
Well, a couple of weeks ago, Israel decided that it had enough. That enough was enough. And so Israel initiated operation, what people are calling Operation Grim beeper the single most hilarious and effective antit terroror operation in history. It turned out, as you'll recall, that Israel had 15 years ago or so founded a beeper company, a fake beeper company. Mossad had done this. They put together a fake beeper company in the knowledge that Hassana Nasrallah, who is the evil terroristic head of Hezbollah, we'll get to him in just a moment, that evil terroristic head would eventually realize that all of his communications were being hacked and he would move to dumb methods of communications like beepers.

That's why Hezbollah's entire infrastructure, their terror infrastructure, they're using beepers like they were in some sort of episode of Seinfeld from 1995 or something. The reason they're using beeper is because they were afraid that if they used iPhones, Israel would hack the iPhones, essentially, they'd be able to monitor all their communications. They started using beepers in about February or March of this year. Israel had not only known that they had sold them the beepers they were using, and so simultaneously they blew up all the beepers a couple of weeks ago, thereby not only handicapping and blowing the balls off of hundreds, if not thousands of Hezbollah terrorists, but also destroying their entire method of communication. They then followed that up by bombing all of their walkie talkies. When they moved from the beepers to their secondary mode of communication, their walkie talkies, it turns out, oops, they bought those from the Israelis also.

So it turns out that the clever Jews had covered again, and all of those blew up. So now their methods of communication were gone. Their top infrastructure was largely damaged, and they didn't really have the ability to do anything because Israel had such great intelligence penetration into Lebanon that it was simultaneously launching massive a assaults from 1600 a assaults over the course of some 36 hours, destroying about half of Hezbollah's long range weaponry. So what did that mean, what that meant to that Israel over the course of the last 10 months has basically taken Hamas outta play. Hamas is still holding about a hundred hostages. Maybe half of those people may be alive, stationed around the head of Hamas if he's in fact still alive, which is unclear at this point because nobody's heard from him for weeks.

So he could theoretically be dead and those hostages could just be sort of dispersed being held by terrorists all over the Gaza Strip. At this point, no one really knows. But in terms of what Israel has accomplished with Kamas Israel in the aftermath of October 7th has wrecked Kamas. I'll say this, the mark of a first world country, the mark of a proper military is not that you never get surprised, the mark of a proper country is that if you do get surprised and you get hurt, you hit back so hard that the people who hit you no longer exist, nor do any of their friends. So the mark of America being a first world country is that when we get hit at Pearl Harbor, we then proceed to launch two of the most destructive assaults on our enemies in world history, on the Japanese and on the Germans.

The mark of the power of the United States is that after nine 11, we took down two countries. These are marks of the actual power. So Israel gets hit on October 7th. It's a massive disaster, the worst intelligence and human disaster in the history of the state of Israel. And they proceed to completely root out Hamas. And they have this threat in the north. And this threat in the north has been used by Hamas as a rationale for not surrendering the hostages because they are hoping. Hamas was hoping in the Gaza Strip that eventually, if it came down to it, Hezbollah would get full skill in the war. And the intimidation factor of Hezbollah in the North would force Israel to make all sorts of concessions to Hamas, including leaving them in power in the Gaza Strip.

So Israel has now completely taken that off the table because not only did they wreck Hezbollah's forward operating power, and remember, Hezbollah is in arm of Iran. So Iran has now had its two nights taken off the board. Hamas has been taken off the board. Hezbollah has been effectively deba. Hezbollah has been really, really hurt. And that was before what happened on Friday. And as for Iran itself, what Iran has shown is that Iran does not actually have the Ford operating capacity in the absence of its proxies to attack Israel in any sort of serious or sophisticated way. You remember earlier this year, they tried to launch an attack on Israel. They fired 300 cruise missiles and drones at Israel. About half of them, because they were crap, fell into Iran themselves, and the rest of them were shot down by Israel and its Western allies, including by the way, Jordan and, and some from Saudi Arabia.

Apparently Saudi Arabia shot down some simultaneously fired missiles from the Houthis. Okay, so what does that mean? It means that Iran has basically demonstrated that it is a paper tiger. Iran needed to be viewed as something really, really scary in the region because that is the only rationale for Israel and the allies not taking out its nuclear program. Only if Iran is scary. Does Iran get to continue to bargain with the United States and the West and have the United States and the West under people like Barack Obama and Joe Biden sign them billions of dollars of checks because they're so scary 'cause oh no, what are they gonna do? So Israel has been pursuing the single most effective military operation in modern history. Israel in Lebanon has lost zero soldiers, zero.

And they have proceeded to take out virtually all of Hezbollah's long range military capacity and their entire leadership structure, all of it, because here's what happened on Friday. So a leader, as I mentioned of Hezbollah, is a man named Hassana Raah. Hassana Raah took over Hezbollah in the early 1990s. He's sort of a charismatic religious figure. He obviously, he also happens to be a genocidal Jew hater. He also hates Christians. If you know your history, what you'll realize that Lebanon used to be a Christian country, used to be run by Christians. And then because of the influx of people from the Palestine Liberation Organization because of the influx of Hezbollah, which is backed by Iran, the influx of Syrian Muslims, because of that Lebanon, which is always multicultural and multi-religious, has turned into a chaotic civil war ridden bleep show.

Lebanon is a disaster area, and that is because of Hezbollah in large part, which is the single most powerful proxy of Iran in the region. We'll get to more on that in a moment.

