Records from the last glacial period show large, potentially forced changes in ENSO variability, although a systematic, model-based attribution of these changes has not been carried out so far12,13,14,15. Furthermore, a lack of common mechanisms linking past and future changes has prevented the use of any reconstructions of past ENSO variability to directly validate the multiple mechanisms controlling ENSO changes under future warming.

We addressed this problem using climate model simulations of key intervals spanning the past 21,000 years (or 21 kilo-annum before present (ka BP))—a period in the history of Earth when global climate experienced substantial changes. We studied common mechanisms between past and future changes in ENSO using additional simulations of greenhouse warming under doubling and quadrupling CO2 concentrations. These simulations are comparable to medium-range and high-emission scenarios, respectively. All simulations were performed with Community Earth System Model v.1.2 (CESM1.2), a model that realistically simulates key ENSO dynamics, including asymmetric event evolution16 and drivers of extreme El Niño events (Methods). We focus on SST variability over the Niño–3.4 region in the central equatorial Pacific (170° W–120° W, 5° S–5° N), where strong ocean–atmosphere interactions give rise to El Niño and La Niña events. We quantify the strength of the different feedbacks involved in the growth of El Niño events to identify common mechanisms driving changes across climatic states. Our technique considers seasonality and asymmetries in the evolution of El Niño and La Niña, which is a marked improvement compared with the previous work4,17. Finally, we validate the simulations against existing and new reconstructions of past climate variability from multiple sites across the tropical Pacific that unambiguously capture changes in ENSO compared with other sources of variability. All reconstructions are based on the individual foraminiferal analyses (IFA) technique that can estimate past interannual ocean temperature and, thus, ENSO variability12,13,14,18,19. Our validation considers the site-specific influence of ENSO on surface and subsurface temperature variations, and rigorous statistical tests of the influence of externally forced changes in variability, including changes in the seasonal cycle (Methods).

Our simulations show that the ENSO phenomenon can experience pronounced changes over a wide range of past and future climate states. Overall levels of ENSO variability increase under greenhouse warming and decrease under glacial conditions (Fig. 1a, bars). These changes—quantified by the standard deviation of SST variability over the Niño–3.4 region—are sufficiently large relative to unforced levels of variability (Fig. 1a, whiskers) and can, therefore, be used for validation against palaeoclimate reconstructions. Simulated ENSO variability reaches its lowest intensity under glacial and deglacial conditions, followed by a rapid increase to near-modern levels of variability as the climate responds to interglacial conditions (Fig. 1a). The simulated ENSO variability shows a weaker upward trend under Holocene conditions, reaching the maximum amplitude for modern, preindustrial conditions (Fig. 1a, 0 ka BP interval). Greenhouse warming results in a pronounced increase in ENSO variability comparable to but not as large as the reductions under glacial conditions.