Holography Unbound
Witten made an unexpected discovery. He started with Liu and Leutheusser’s holographic black hole — an idealized model of smooth space-time, with no tremors and no quantum gravity. He then tweaked the boundary fields to allow extremely mild quantum quivers to creep into the bulk space-time. The change dissolved the type III algebra Liu and Leutheusser had seen into a type II algebra, making it possible to calculate changes in entropy (although not entropy itself — the level of the water came into view, but not the bottom of the beaker). “It completely changed the algebra,” Speranza said. “It was like a phase transition.”

Researchers noticed that Witten’s discovery didn’t rely heavily on the AdS/CFT context; the type II algebra seemed like a feature of any black hole experiencing mild tremors from the presence of matter. So Penington reached out to Witten, and together with Venkatesa Chandrasekaran they set out to move his calculation(opens a new tab) out of the AdS setting.

Their work suggests that a lightly quantum theory of a black hole in any kind of space-time has a type II algebra. Using that type of algebra to calculate how much the entropy of a black hole changes as matter falls into it, they found(opens a new tab) that the entropy goes up by a fixed amount, exactly as you’d expect if the black hole emerged from rearrangeable parts, analogous to a gas.

A bespectacled man in a green shirt sits in an office.
Edward Witten, a physicist at the Institute for Advanced Study, recently showed that mild quantum fluctuations of space-time can transform its algebra, making it easier to understand.

Sorce calls this finding “revolutionary” in that it echoes a crucial step in the prehistory of quantum mechanics. In the mid-1800s, physicists discovered a mysterious entropy that related to the efficiency of steam engines, but they weren’t sure what it meant. Then, toward the end of the century, Josiah Gibbs and Ludwig Boltzmann worked out how to calculate how entropy grows — as a gas expands, for instance — bolstering their suspicion that gases should be made of something like atoms. That work set the stage for quantum mechanics to explain the entropy of a gas in terms of its atoms in the 1900s.

For black holes, an analogous history dates back to the 1970s, when Jacob Bekenstein and Stephen Hawking took the first step of discovering that these entities have entropy. Physicists have taken this to mean that the contorted space-time fabric of a black hole may be made of atomlike parts, just like a gas. Now Witten and collaborators have done for black holes what Gibbs and Boltzmann did for gases: figured how to compare the entropies of two different states of a black hole. It’s a more concrete hint that their entropies do indeed reflect their microscopic parts.