Mammals possess a unique secondarily evolved jaw joint between the dentary and squamosal bones1,2. The elements forming the ancestral jaw joint, the quadrate and articular, were separated from the lower jaw during the evolution of mammals from Mesozoic era fossil relatives, the non-mammaliaform cynodonts1,2,3,4,5. The evolution of the dentary–squamosal articulation is therefore key to understanding the origin of the unique mammalian body plan. Newly discovered non-mammaliaform cynodonts from the Late Triassic of South America are well placed, both in time and in the evolutionary tree, to answer when and how often the precursor conditions to this load-bearing jaw joint first evolved. Here we use micro-computed-tomography (μCT) scanning to analyse the jaw joint morphology of three key non-mammaliaform cynodont species and identify the oldest example of a dentary–squamosal contact in the fossil record in R. guaibensis9, predating that seen in Mammaliaformes by approximately 17 million years10,11,12. Our updated phylogenetic analyses show that this contact evolved independently from that of mammal precursors, demonstrating that this classical feature is more evolutionarily labile than previously thought. B. quadrangularis, the sister taxon to Mammaliaformes, does not possess a dentary–squamosal jaw articulation as was previously interpreted6,7,8. Evolutionary experimentation in jaw joint morphology occurred across the cynodont–mammaliaform transition, coinciding with the evolution of features such as thermoregulation, insectivory and miniaturization that would become key elements of the mammalian body plan for millions of years to come13,14,15,16,17,18.

Among the most important diagnostic features of mammals are a unique middle ear containing three ossicles (malleus, incus, stapes) and a load-bearing jaw hinge comprising a dentary condyle and squamosal glenoid3,4,19,20. The definitive mammalian middle ear (also called the detached middle ear21,22) evolved within Mammaliaformes during the Mesozoic, with fossil and developmental evidence suggesting that this event occurred at least three times independently20,23,24,25. However, the major morphological changes needed to facilitate this innovation took place in non-mammaliaform cynodonts (hereafter, cynodonts), the precursors of mammals5,26. The fossil record documents the evolution of the jaw from early diverging cynodonts to mammaliaforms1,2,4, in which the postdentary bones (articular, prearticular, surangular, angular) are reduced in size compared with the tooth-bearing dentary to become a collection of thin, rod-like elements as their role in jaw articulation is incrementally reduced (Fig. 1). Eucynodonts experimented with several modifications to the skull that improved sensorial and feeding habits, coupled with the formation of a secondary jaw articulation in between the surangular boss and the articular flange of the squamosal2,26. Further morphological changes led to the formation of the load-bearing dentary–squamosal joint, consisting of a distinct dentary condyle that articulates to the glenoid cavity of the squamosal bordered posteriorly by a glenoid ridge. In early-diverging mammaliaforms such as Morganucodon, Sinoconodon and others, the dentary–squamosal articulation lies alongside the plesiomorphic quadrate–articular joint27,28,29. The formation of the dentary–squamosal jaw articulation freed the postdentary bones from their ancestral role as load-bearing elements and allowed them to specialize for sound detection and finally separate from the lower jaw entirely in crown mammals (Fig. 1). Understanding the phylogenetic history and timing of evolution of the dentary–squamosal contact through the cynodont–mammaliaform transition is therefore crucial to interpretation of the origin of this unique mammalian structure.

