with the Nietzschean death of God, which is the appropriate association, the demolition of the higher unity that, say, held Western culture together and gave it its enthusiastic impetus over the last 2,000 years. We've exhausted that in a sense, and because of that people are hedonistic and nihilistic and hopeless and anxious and lost. And that's not a wonderful condition. Now, one of the consequences of such conditions, mythologically speaking, is that it's at those times when something new is born. That's why Christ is born at the darkest point of the year, for example. It's a very common mythological motif. And we examine today what it is that died, I would say, and also what it is that's in the difficult process of being born,

and what beneficial and monstrous forms that might take, and how that's making itself manifest in the popular and intellectual culture. And so, join us for that inquiry. So, one of the centerpieces of the argument that you make in this book, Recapture the Rapture, is derived from Nietzsche's famous observation about the death of God. So I thought maybe we could start by talking about that. It seems to me that if you wanted to secularize that discussion, you'd do it in something approximating the following manner. You'd assume that there's only two possibilities, and one possibility would be that our perceptions and our thoughts and our goal-directed striving moves towards something approximating a higher order or transcendental unity, or it doesn't. Those are the only two options as far as I can tell.

The idea of a monotheistic God at the bottom of everything or at the top is an elaboration of the idea that all the things that human beings are oriented towards come together in a unity. And the problem with questioning that hypothesis is that you fall into the problem that there's no organizing principle at all. That's the problem of nihilism. Or alternatively, you fall into the problem that if there's nothing that unites our striving at the highest level, then we have to live in psychological

and social conflict because the various things that drive us will be antagonistic to one another. So, you fall into the problem of nihilism or a disunified plurality. Another problem emerges too, and both Nietzsche and Dostoevsky pointed to this because they were thinking along parallel tracks, which is that if the hypothesis that has served as the highest unity disappears and a unity is psychologically and socially necessary, then other forms of unity will emerge to replace the dead value. And so I would say, and this also follows Nietzsche and Dostoevsky's thought, that one of the things that we've seen happening in consequence of the death of God apart from nihilism and plurality is the insistence that power, for example, unifies. That's a Marxist insistence or a postmodern insistence that the only unifying narrative is one of power.

And so the unity problem looks to me like it's inescapable, whether you approach it from a religious perspective or a secular perspective. And that's the landscape of the problem as far as I can tell, like all of those different consequences let's say of the death of God are problematic to say the least. I'll close with one other observation because it's in some ways what you're striving towards as far as I can tell in this book. If there's a unity at the pinnacle, let's say, then what is its nature and also what should be its nature? So I would say for example that attempting to unify yourself or a society on the basis of power is a counterproductive enterprise.

That's not a principle that's going to produce an iterable game, a continually playable game, an expandable game, or a desirable game. So well those are some, you know, I've been meditating on what you've written, and those are some of the thoughts that came to mind. So I guess I'd be interested in your thoughts on those issues. Yeah, I mean, I think the first thing, just to clarify, is that everybody knows the God is dead bumper sticker slogan for Nietzsche. Not everybody knows the rest of that paragraph. Not everybody knows the rest of that paragraph.