TET methylcytosine dioxygenases (TET1, TET2 and TET3) mediate oxidation of DNA 5-methylcytosine (5mC) to regulate gene expression in a wide range of different biological systems6,7,8. Among them, TET2 is unique in that it distinctly exhibits high mutation ratios in myeloid malignancies (Extended Data Fig. 1a), with frequent IDH mutations observed in human cancers also thought to mainly act through TET2 inhibition9,10,11. TET2 deficiency led to genomic DNA hypomethylation9, suggesting that functional outcomes caused by TET2 deficiency might not primarily associate with its DNA oxidation activity. TET2 is also unique among TET enzymes in that it is not covalently linked to the zinc-finger CXXC domain protein CXXC4 or CXXC512,13,14; the interaction between TET2 and CXXC4/CXXC5 is critical for DNA binding by TET215 (Extended Data Fig. 1b). In mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells, it was shown that TET2 binds to PSPC1, an RNA-binding protein, to mediate RNA 5-methylcytosine (m5C) oxidation16. Other studies also reported RNA m5C oxidation by TET2 or Drosophila TET homologue17,18,19,20. We and others have recently reported chromatin regulation through reversible N6-methyladenosine modification on chromatin-associated RNA (caRNA)21,22,23,24,25. These advances prompted us to examine potential chromatin regulation through TET2-mediated caRNA m5C oxidation.

Tet2-knockout (KO) mES cells exhibited more open chromatin (Fig. 1a) and elevated global transcription (Fig. 1b) compared with the wild type (WT). Transcription rates of protein-coding genes were also higher in Tet2-KO mES cells when compared to those in WT (Extended Data Fig. 1c–e). The more-open chromatin state agrees well with the previously reported global DNA hypomethylation caused by TET2 deficiency26 (Extended Data Fig. 1f) but is inconsistent with a predominant DNA 5mC oxidation function.

To examine the functional outcomes of RNA oxidation by TET2, we studied Pspc1-KO mES cells. Spike-in-calibrated assay for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATAC–seq) revealed globally increased chromatin accessibility in both Pspc1-KO and Tet2-KO mES cells (Extended Data Fig. 1g), with the more-opened chromatin loci notably overlapping and correlating with each other (Extended Data Fig. 1h,i). The DNA 5mC levels did not significantly change, while an increase in caRNA m5C levels was detected after Pspc1 KO using ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC–MS/MS) measurements (Extended Data Fig. 1j). The same chromatin openness and global transcription increases were observed in Pspc1-KO mES cells (Extended Data Fig. 1k,l). Overexpression of an RNA-binding-null PSPC1 mutant did not rescue these chromatin changes (Extended Data Fig. 1m). Moreover, overexpression of WT Tet2, but not its catalytic dead mutant (Tet2HxD, hereafter HxD)27, decreased the transcription rate and chromatin accessibility in Tet2 KO, but not in Pspc1-KO mES cells (Fig. 1c). Global chromatin accessibility profiling also demonstrated a similar trend (Extended Data Fig. 1n,o). These results indicate that the TET2-mediated chromatin compaction and transcription repression are dependent on its enzymatic activity on RNA.

Consistent with the role of TET2 in suppressing transcription, the upregulation of caRNAs in Pspc1-KO mES cells, rather than whole-cell mRNAs, exhibited a stronger correlation with the changes observed after Tet2 KO (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1p). The elevated caRNA expression correlates with DNA hypomethylated regions instead of hypermethylated regions (Extended Data Fig. 1q). Overexpression of WT Tet2, but not HxD, was able to restore normal caRNA expression levels in Tet2-KO mES cells (Fig. 1e). Thus, while TET2 can act on either DNA or RNA, in mES cells, the TET2-mediated gene repression changes appear to be associated with its RNA-targeting activity.

