Ladies and gentlemen, I don’t want to deliver a long speech, and I think it’s much more important to have an interaction and try to confront our points of view. But let’s say that, for me, the EU, in order to face this multipolar order that you mentioned, has to deliver on its agenda. I think the big challenge for the EU—Mario Draghi just issued a report—I delivered a speech about a month ago, and the tone of these approaches could seem very pessimistic: the EU could die, and we are at the verge of a very important moment. I think this is quite true; we are at risk.

I think we delivered very concrete and positive results during the COVID crisis and in response to the war of aggression launched by Russia in Ukraine. But when you look at the picture, what is at risk is the growth model of our countries, and the fact that the EU has to deliver more autonomy. We are obsessed with that, and this is the agenda we put at the Versailles Summit, which is now core for the European Union. But we have to deliver on climate change, AI, defense, and the security agenda. We have to completely reshape our own growth model because the situation is the following: on these key items, we are lagging behind both the US and China. They invest much more; they are much more advanced.

When you look at the growth on a per capita basis, if you take the past three decades, the US delivered an increase of 60%, while we delivered an increase of 30%. It’s not sustainable with the social model we have, and you cannot adjust just on the social model because it’s unbearable for your people and existing democracy.

So I just want to share some key ideas. I’ve noted that for all of Europe to deliver this agenda, we need a simplification shock. This is the first point. Why? Because we are at the technological border in terms of regulation, and you cannot deliver such an agenda alone. Today, there is a desynchronization with the US and China. So we need a big simplification shock—something to be discussed. We have to discuss some very recent regulations that could kill our business. Clearly, we have to deepen the single market because simplification is supposed to be the DNA of the EU, but we haven’t followed this DNA in recent years, which is a big issue.

In sectors like health, energy, and data, we need to build a real single market. On these key sectors, we need a European market because if we want speed and scale for our leaders and startups, we need a domestic market of over 400 million customers, not 27 domestic markets in these sectors.

The second point is about trade. We lived in a world for decades where everything was built on trade in an open market, complying with WTO regulations. This is over. Let’s be clear: 25 years ago, we thought that by China joining the WTO, they would comply with the rules. This is not the case. The big change is that in 2022, the US decided not to comply with WTO regulations anymore. When both the US and China don’t respect the rules, we should not be the only ones in the room playing by the book. This doesn’t fly.

I don’t suggest we become protectionist—an awful word—but at least we should be fair to our industry, our farmers, and our people. We need to preserve a level playing field. When competitors receive massive subsidies, making the market unbearable for your own players, you have to correct it. This is why I support the Commission’s stance on electric vehicles with China. We have to protect the level playing field across industries, otherwise, we will lose out. Today, we are the adjustment factor for global players, from steel to carmakers. They may arbitrage with the European market, but they prefer places with better subsidies and less competitive pressure.

We have to either build the same instruments or restore the level playing field in all sectors impacted by subsidies—whether from China or the US. In December 2022, I advocated for a European IRA (Inflation Reduction Act). We were too slow, too fragmented, and did not deliver the right scale of subsidies. We also need a strong coordinated European response to environmental, digital, and security changes. We need a coordinated industry policy.

My third point: we need better coordination between industrial and environmental policies. The EU must become the first continent to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 with a strong industrial base. But we must do this without killing our industrial base or renouncing our climate commitments. This is demanding, but if well-coordinated, it’s a tremendous opportunity for European businesses. We need to continue along the path of the Green Deal, the Net Zero Industry Act, and the Border Carbon Adjustment Mechanism, but without adding more regulations. We should focus on simple things that will help us deliver this agenda: more investment, especially because we are investing less in clean energy than the US.

We need to build more energy autonomy, based on technological neutrality. This means producing low-carbon energy in any place in Europe and ensuring households and businesses have access to the energy they need at reasonable prices.

Beyond energy, this industrial policy logic must prevail in all sectors, including defense, critical raw materials, digital technologies, semiconductors, health, and agri-food. We need to step up our innovation efforts and help our players scale within Europe. Innovation is the key driver of the difference between Europe and the US.

Lastly, we need more investment. We don’t invest enough money, and we need to focus on key sectors to build our resilience, strategic autonomy, and innovation agenda. The current budget isn’t sufficient. We need to mobilize much more private money, but we face big problems: fragmented capital markets, overly restrictive regulations, and a lack of European Champions. We need a European Capital Markets Union to optimize investment across regions and sectors.

Those are the key points I wanted to highlight. We need to act quickly if we want a more efficient Europe, able to deliver growth while preserving our social model. Thank you.