Portuguese presence on the island of Timor started sometime in the 16th century. In the 20th century, anti-colonial movements in Portuguese Africa prompted the emergence of a national identity in East Timor.[1] Portuguese Timor was still a relatively peaceful colony under Portuguese rule when the 25 April 1974 Carnation Revolution overthrew the previous Portuguese regime, despite armed rebellion occurring in other Portuguese colonies. The new government was nonetheless committed to the decolonisation of East Timor.[2]: 411  Governor Fernando Alves Aldeia [pt] was instructed to prepare for decolonisation while maintaining a good relationship with Indonesia. He created the Timor Commission for Self-Determination on 13 May 1975. Self-determination for its colonies was enshrined in the Constitution of Portugal around this time.[3]: 14–15 

Political parties aside from the former National Union were legalised, and five parties formed in East Timor. The two largest were the Timorese Democratic Union (UDT) and the Revolutionary Front for an Independent East Timor (Fretilin). The Timorese Popular Democratic Association (Apodeti) emerged as a third party, while the minor Association of Timorese Heroes (KOTA) and Timorese Labour Party (Trabalhista) did not gain traction.[2]: 411–412  The three major parties were all formed in May, UDT on 11 May, Fretilin (as the Timorese Social Democratic Association) on 20 May, and Apodeti on 27 May.[4]

Political developments occurred in the shadow of the interest of neighbouring Indonesia, who controlled the western side of Timor island.[2]: 417  When Suharto took control of Indonesia in 1966 the Indonesian military launched some minor attacks in the isolated Oecusse enclave, which were stopped by Portuguese forces.[1] In April 1972, the Indonesian foreign minister Adam Malik stated that Indonesia was open to supporting anti-Portuguese activity.[2]: 417 

UDT formed from members of the former National Union party, and was linked to government officials, police, local rulers, the Catholic church, and Portuguese and Chinese businessmen. It was conservative and sought to protect the middle class of Dili, advocating for an undisruptive transition that maintained existing government systems and close links to Portugal. There was some internal division about the timeframe of future independence, although the party did shift from its initial position of autonomy to supporting full independence at a later time.[2]: 411–414 [3]: 15  The first UDT leader, Mário Viegas Carrascalão, was a coffee magnate seen as close to the previous regime. He was soon replaced by Francisco Lopes da Cruz [de], director of the A Voz de Timor [pt] newspaper.[5]: 8 

Fretilin was formed by former independence activists. It was led by individuals including Francisco Xavier do Amaral, a government official, José Ramos-Horta, a reporter for A Voz de Timor who had previously been exiled for political reasons, and Nicolau dos Reis Lobato, a teacher.[5]: 10  Some members had engaged in previous discussions with Indonesia regarding support for an armed independence movement. Originally a social democratic party that formed trade unions, Fretilin adopted a broader ideology (and renamed itself from the initial "Timorese Social Democratic Association") called "mauberism" to gain appeal outside of urban areas. This new ideology was an anti-poverty platform seeking to improve the lives of poorer East Timorese. Fretilin sought to establish a new political system based on local councils, with other levels of government formed by delegates from lower levels, and where national government leaders would be required to maintain links to rural areas and would not be allowed ostentatious possessions. The party explicitly distanced itself from communism and sought a non-aligned foreign policy based on relationships with nearby countries and links to ASEAN and the Portuguese-speaking world. While seeking to expropriate large land-owning Portuguese-run businesses, Fretilin did not seek to disrupt Catholic and ethnic Chinese schools and businesses.[2]: 411–414 

Neighbouring Indonesia had pledged to respect East Timorese self-determination so long as it did not threaten Indonesian stability. The third major party, Apodeti, advocated for a full union with Indonesia. However, it gained little support outside of Atsabe Administrative Post. UDT viewed their proposed pathway of a smooth transition that opened East Timor up to foreign investment as likely acceptable to Indonesia. Fretilin did not advocate for links to communist countries such as China and the Soviet Union to avoid antagonising Indonesia.[2]: 411–414  Apodeti received financial and communications assistance from Indonesia.[2]: 417  Apodeti was led by Arnaldo dos Reis Araújo [pt], and other members included Guilherme Maria Gonçalves [pt], the ruler (Liurai) of Atsabe, and José Abílio Osório Soares.[5]: 11  The development of a paramilitary wing within Apodeti was followed by similar developments in UDT and Fretilin.[3]: 26 

Having recently lost the Vietnam War, Western anti-communist countries were wary of the spread of communism further into Southeast Asia, and saw Indonesia as an ally in this regard. Indonesia did not have a policy to annex East Timor, but the possibility had been raised at various points in the past and the possibility on the minds of both Indonesian and Portuguese authorities. Many countries also shared economic ties with Indonesia, or simply did not view the territory as a viable independent state. East Timor received much less attention both in Portugal and in international circles than Portugal's other colonies, which were also undergoing decolonisation.[3]: 14, 17–20 

The Portuguese minister for inter-territorial coordination, António de Almeida Santos, visited the region in October 1974, for meetings in East Timor, Australia, and Indonesia to discuss the future of the territory.[5]: 13  In November 1974 Mário Lemos Pires, a military officer linked to the new Portuguese regime rather than the overthrown one, was appointed Governor of East Timor. He tried to create an advisory council, however Apodeti would not participate, and Fretilin later withdrew.[5]: 14 