George Orwell once said something so dumb only an intellectual could believe it. What is that instinct that makes people believe certain things? In general, smart people tend to be more resistant to cognitive illusions, fallacies, and biases, with one exception being the my-side bias. This is when you give a pass to errors in arguments that make your own coalition look good and the other coalition look stupid and evil. People on both the left and right are equally susceptible to this, and it’s more or less independent of intelligence.

It goes back to the artificiality of the moment we think we’re living in, where we like to believe we can determine the truth about things like who killed JFK. There’s forensics, arguments like Gerald Posner’s, which are pretty convincing, but for most of history, the documentary record, forensics, ballistics, and evidence like the Zapruder film weren’t available. It was almost an academic exercise to figure out what really happened because no one could know.

So, if no one could know, should you believe anything? No. You believe the story that serves the greater moral purpose, whether that’s exposing corrupt powerful forces or teaching the right moral values. The question is, why don’t intelligent people trust what you and I would call credible sources, like a journalist such as Gerald Posner or the Warren Commission? Though flawed, they probably came to the right conclusion, as do science and academia when they’re functioning properly.

The problem is that universities and journalistic outlets are squandering the trust that leads people to accept beliefs that are likelier to be true. When people say we have to combat misinformation, I wince a little because I prefer the market to combat it in a way. Usually, there seems to be some ideological component to combating misinformation. For example, a lot of COVID misinformation turned out to be, if not true, at least not obviously false.

What about the argument that misinformation allowed Donald Trump to win the 2016 election and diluted his supporters about the 2020 election? Well, it’s an empirical question. Analyses by political scientists like Brendan Nyhan suggest the impact of fake news was negligible. It didn’t reach that many people, and those who did see it, like the Pope Francis endorses Donald Trump story, were probably already Trump fanatics.

There may have been a moral panic over disinformation in 2016. “Stop the Steal” isn’t even misinformation; it’s just a lie. When people presume that two million views of an Alex Jones video equate to two million people agreeing with him, they’re mistaken. Many viewers might think, “This guy’s out of his mind.”

We do have filters for credibility, and most people aren’t born yesterday. Language wouldn’t have evolved if it were that easy to implant beliefs. Cognitive psychologist Hugo Mercier, in his book Not Born Yesterday, argues that misinformation doesn’t spread as easily as we fear, and that’s a reason not to panic about deepfakes. They can be misused, but people don’t automatically believe them, and they’re quickly debunked.

Even sources like CNN, The Wall Street Journal, and The New York Times might publish things that don’t turn out to be true, but you’re still better off trusting them than Alex Jones.

Where are we now as a world? In some ways, my book Enlightenment Now could be seen as an anti-MAGA book, because it praises things like free trade, which have led to enormous declines in poverty and increases in life expectancy. Yet both Democrats and Republicans are now in a protectionist, mercantilist mindset, despite these benefits.

Since Enlightenment Now went to press in 2017, some trends have gotten worse. Homicide rates, war deaths, and the state of democracies have worsened, and global trade has slowed down, but it hasn’t undone the progress. Still, we’re going in the wrong direction, erasing a decade or two of gains.

Part of my argument in both Enlightenment Now and The Better Angels of Our Nature is that Enlightenment values have increased over time—values like human rights, democracy, open economies, and science. These values have led to benefits like reduced disease, child mortality, maternal mortality, and extreme poverty, as well as fewer wars. But there’s no law that says these values have to keep increasing.

Enlightenment ideals, in many ways, go against features of human nature, like tribalism, authoritarianism, puritanism, and magical thinking. Authoritarianism, for instance, is part of human nature. John Haidt, in his moral foundations theory, includes deference to authority as one of the moral keys available to us. It’s something people tend to fall into, though not always.